---
title: '2. Fix issues GitHub Advanced Security found'
layout: default
nav_order: 2
parent: 'Exercise 04: Make things secure'
---

## Introduction

Now that the Munson's Pickles and Preserves team has GitHub Advanced Security in place, they would like your assistance in resolving the issues the tool has found. They see a variety of issues, from vulnerable dependencies to secrets exposed in code, and even coding practices that may be dangerous.

## Description

In this task, you will improve the security of your repository using some of GitHub's built-in tools.

1. You should have one security issue from code scanning. Review the security issue and read up on how to correct the issue. Create a new GitHub Issue from the code scanning alert.
2. You should have one security issue from secret scanning. Create a separate GitHub Issue from the security alert. In reviewing this alert, one of the developers informs you that this secret is part of a local configuration file and that file should not be checked into source control at all.
3. You should have one Dependabot alert due to a vulnerable version of a library. Try to use Dependabot to fix this package version and create a new pull request with the change. If it does not work, create a GitHub Issue for this Dependabot alert.
4. Create a new feature branch. Then, use GitHub Copilot to assist you in resolving all of the outstanding security issues.
5. Create a pull request, closing out the issues that you've resolved. Use GitHub Copilot Enterprise to generate a meaningful pull request message and have another learner review your code changes. Merge your code into the main branch of your repository.

## Success Criteria

- In GitHub, you should be able to view the 'closed' pull request with your changes.
- The **Security** tab shows no outstanding alerts for Dependabot, Code scanning, or Secret scanning.

## Learning Resources

- [Learn more about adding a security policy to your repository](https://docs.github.com/en/github/managing-security-vulnerabilities/adding-a-security-policy-to-your-repository).
- [Learn more about Dependabot and vulnerable dependencies](https://docs.github.com/en/github/managing-security-vulnerabilities/managing-vulnerabilities-in-your-projects-dependencies).
- [Learn more about automated code scanning and understanding results](https://docs.github.com/en/github/finding-security-vulnerabilities-and-errors-in-your-code).

## Tips

- If you are stuck, review the details provided for each of the vulnerability alerts. This may include sample code to cause and fix a security issue, as well as links to additional resources.

## Solution

<details markdown="block">
<summary>Expand this section to view the solution</summary>

1. Select **Security** in your repo, then **Code scanning**. Select the 'Arbitrary file access during archive extraction ("Zip Slip")' code issue. Select **Create issue** to create a GitHub issue around this code scanning alert.
2. After creating an issue for the code scanning alert, navigate back to **Security** and then select **Secret scanning**. TODO: continue this!
3. After creating an issue for the secret scanning alert, navigate back to the **Security** page and then select **Dependabot**. Select the 'Improper Handling of Exceptional Conditions in Newtonsoft.Json' alert. Then, select **Create Dependabot security update** to have Dependabot try to fix this issue. TODO: continue this!
4. Create a new feature branch and give it a name like 'security-fixes'. Fetch changes from your machine and then check out and pull the new branch using the Git command line, Visual Studio Code, or your tool of choice.
5. In GitHub, navigate back to the **Security** page and then select **Code scanning**. Select the code issue once again. Choose "Show more" to view details on the security issue. It turns out that an attacker could traverse to an arbitrary directory based on the way the MP&P staff wrote this function. In order to correct the function and prevent a directory traversal attack, update the `WriteToDirectory()` function. You can highlight the function, strike `Ctrl+i` or `Command+i`, and use a prompt like "Please update this function to prevent a directory traversal attack."

    For comparison, the following code will not be vulnerable to a directory traversal attack:

    ```csharp
    public static void WriteToDirectory(ZipArchiveEntry entry, string destDirectory)
    {
        string destFileName = Path.GetFullPath(Path.Combine(destDirectory, entry.FullName));
        string fullDestDirPath = Path.GetFullPath(destDirectory + Path.DirectorySeparatorChar);
        if (!destFileName.StartsWith(fullDestDirPath)) {
            throw new System.InvalidOperationException("Entry is outside the target dir: " + destFileName);
        }
        entry.ExtractToFile(destFileName);
    }
    ```

6. TODO: notes on correcting the secret scan alert
7. TODO: dependabot alert work needed?
8. Commit the code changes you have made, using GitHub Copilot to assist with creating a commit message. Include in your commit messages any issues you have resolved. Then, create a pull request to the main branch. Use GitHub Copilot Enterprise to create a relevant pull request message.
9. Assign another learner as a reviewer for the pull request. Ensure that the other learner completes the code review and approves your changes.
10. You should see a CodeQL scan for the pull request. Assuming that it succeeds and the other learner has approved your changes, complete the pull request. Then, return to the **Security** page and confirm that no issues remain on any of the three lists.

</details>
